Correct CF calculations and add campaign statistical comparison (#1)
JuleRadtke/how_to_eurec4a: how_to_eurec4a/cloudmasks.md

    return ~(np.isnan(da) | ("unknown" in meanings and da==meanings["unknown"]))

def _cloudy_max(da):
    meanings = dict(zip(da.flag_meanings.split(" "), da.flag_values))
    return (da==meanings["most_likely_cloudy"]) | (da==meanings["probably_cloudy"])

def _cloudy_min(da):
    meanings = dict(zip(da.flag_meanings.split(" "), da.flag_values))
    return da==meanings["most_likely_cloudy"]

def cfmin(ds):
    sumdims = [d for d in ds.cloud_mask.dims if d != "time"]
    return (_cloudy_min(ds.cloud_mask).sum(dim=sumdims)
            / _isvalid(ds.cloud_mask).sum(dim=sumdims))

def cfmax(ds):
    sumdims = [d for d in ds.cloud_mask.dims if d != "time"]
    return (_cloudy_max(ds.cloud_mask).sum(dim=sumdims)
            / _isvalid(ds.cloud_mask).sum(dim=sumdims))

def correct_VELOX(ds):
    return ds.assign(CF_min=ds.CF_min.where((ds.CF_min >=0 ) & (ds.CF_min <= 1)),
                     CF_max=ds.CF_max.where((ds.CF_max >=0 ) & (ds.CF_max <= 1)))

def ensure_cfminmax(ds):
    if "CF_min" not in ds:
        ds = ds.assign(CF_min=cfmin)
    if "CF_max" not in ds:
        ds = ds.assign(CF_max=cfmax)
    return correct_VELOX(ds)

> def load_cloudmask_dataset(cat_item):
>     return ensure_cfminmax(xr.concat([v.get().to_dask().chunk()
>                                       for _, v in cat_item.items()], dim="time"))

Reviewer: This one loads the individual datasets (and in particular coordinate indices) for each flight day in parallel. That should have a bit of an effect on data loading speed.
```suggestion
from multiprocessing.pool import ThreadPool

def load_cloudmask_dataset(cat_item):
    # load in parallel as this function is mainly limited by the network roundtrip time
    p = ThreadPool(20)
    return ensure_cfminmax(xr.concat(list(p.map(lambda v: v.get().to_dask().chunk(), cat_item.values())),
                                     dim="time"))
```

```

From WALES we also include the cloud top height information

```{code-cell} ipython3
da_cth = cat.HALO.WALES.cloudparameter["HALO-0205"].to_dask().cloud_top.sel(time=s)
```

#### SpecMACS imager radiance
From specMACS we include the radiances at 1.6 micron in the short-wave infrared (SWIR). Note: this sepcMACS radiance dataset is only available for the following application on February 5, not for the whole campaign.

```{code-cell} ipython3
url = ("https://observations.ipsl.fr/thredds/dodsC/EUREC4A/PRODUCTS/SPECMACS-CLOUDMASK/"
       + "EUREC4A_HALO_specMACS_cloud_mask_20200205T100000-20200205T182359_v1.1.nc")
ds_swir = xr.open_dataset(url, engine="netcdf4")
da_swir = ds_swir.sel(time=s).isel(radiation_wavelength=0).swir_radiance
```

#### Preprocess cloud mask data

We copy the data dictionary and apply the time selection.

+++

For the 2D horizontal imagers we select a region in the center, derive a representative `cloud_mask` flag value and use that in the following intercomparison plot.
* VELOX: we select only the cetral 10 x 10 pixels
* SpecMACS: we select the central 0.6 degrees, i.e. angle = 0 ∓ 0.3

```{code-cell} ipython3

> def most_frequent(da):
>     flag, n = np.unique(da.values, return_counts=True)
>     return xr.DataArray(int(flag[np.argmax(n)]), dims=())
> 
> def select_specmacs_cloudmask(ds):
>     specmacs = ds.sel(angle=slice(.3, -.3))
>     return ds.assign({"cloud_mask": specmacs.cloud_mask.groupby("time").map(most_frequent),
>                       "CF_min": cfmin(specmacs),
>                       "CF_max": cfmax(specmacs)})
> 
> def select_velox_cloudmask(ds):
>     xmid = ds.x.size // 2
>     ymid = ds.y.size // 2
>     velox = ds.isel(x=slice(xmid - 5, xmid + 5), y=slice(ymid - 5, ymid + 5))
>     return ds.assign({"cloud_mask": velox.cloud_mask.groupby("time").map(most_frequent),
>                       "CF_min": cfmin(velox),
>                       "CF_max": cfmax(velox)})

Reviewer: This one should provide quite a bit of speed-up.

Take-home-message: `groupby` is really slow...
```suggestion
def most_frequent_flag(var, dims):
    flags = xr.DataArray(var.flag_values, dims=("__internal__flags__"))
    flag_indices = (var == flags).sum(dims).argmax("__internal__flags__")
    return xr.DataArray(var.flag_values[flag_indices.data],
                        dims=flag_indices.dims,
                        attrs=var.attrs)

def select_specmacs_cloudmask(ds):
    specmacs = ds.sel(angle=slice(.3, -.3))
    return ds.assign({"cloud_mask": most_frequent_flag(specmacs.cloud_mask, "angle"),
                      "CF_min": cfmin(specmacs),
                      "CF_max": cfmax(specmacs)})

def select_velox_cloudmask(ds):
    xmid = ds.x.size // 2
    ymid = ds.y.size // 2
    velox = ds.isel(x=slice(xmid - 5, xmid + 5), y=slice(ymid - 5, ymid + 5))
    return ds.assign({"cloud_mask": most_frequent_flag(velox.cloud_mask, ("x", "y")),
                      "CF_min": cfmin(velox),
                      "CF_max": cfmax(velox)})
```

%pylab inline
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
import eurec4a
import numpy as np
import xarray as xr
import matplotlib as mpl
mpl.rcParams['font.size'] = 12

from mpl_toolkits.axes_grid1 import make_axes_locatable
from matplotlib.colors import LogNorm
```

We generally don't support ignoring warnings, however, we do so in this notebook to suppress warnings originating from zero division. Unfortunately, we coudn't find another way to handle the warnings. If you have an idea, please make a pull request and change it :)

```{code-cell} ipython3
import warnings
warnings.filterwarnings("ignore")
```

### Cloud fraction functions
We define some utility functions to extract (circle) cloud cover estimates from different datasets assuming that the datasets follow a certain flag meaning convention.  

In particular, we define a **minimum cloud fraction** based on the cloud mask flag `most_likely_cloudy` and a **maximum cloud fraction** combining the flags `most_likely_cloudy` and `probably_cloudy`. The cloud mask datasets slightly vary in their flag definition for cloud free conditions and their handling of unvalid measurements which is taken care of by the following functions.

> 

Reviewer 2: Great! The word `cloud fraction` still confuses me a bit when thinking about the 1D horizontal cloud masks in time, probably its better to stick to the term `cloud mask flag`, so `minimum cloud mask flag` and `maximum cloud mask flag`?

Author: Hm. The `minimum` of `cloud mask flag` would be quite misleading as that minimum of possible flag values in our case would be `-1` : `unknown`. The operator `minimum` applied over `time` will provide us with a time-fraction of the cloud mask`flag`, which is exactly what we want. So I would argue that `min / max cloud fraction` is the correct term at this point. Sometimes it helps me to think of the (1D) cloud mask such as from WALES as a 2D array with the dimensions `time` and `flag`. Not sure whether this is more intuitive?

Reviewer 2: Ah true, that is also confusing. I have no problem with the term cloud fraction if applied over e.g. time, but only naming it so in the functions "just" combining the cloud flags. But anyways, these are details, I think it gets clear if going along with the notebook.

```{code-cell} ipython3
def _isvalid(da):
    meanings = dict(zip(da.flag_meanings.split(" "), da.flag_values))
    return ~(np.isnan(da) | ("unknown" in meanings and da==meanings["unknown"]))

def _cloudy_max(da):
    meanings = dict(zip(da.flag_meanings.split(" "), da.flag_values))
    return (da==meanings["most_likely_cloudy"]) | (da==meanings["probably_cloudy"])

def _cloudy_min(da):
    meanings = dict(zip(da.flag_meanings.split(" "), da.flag_values))
    return da==meanings["most_likely_cloudy"]

def cfmin(ds):
    sumdims = [d for d in ds.cloud_mask.dims if d != "time"]
    return (_cloudy_min(ds.cloud_mask).sum(dim=sumdims)
            / _isvalid(ds.cloud_mask).sum(dim=sumdims))

def cfmax(ds):
    sumdims = [d for d in ds.cloud_mask.dims if d != "time"]
    return (_cloudy_max(ds.cloud_mask).sum(dim=sumdims)
            / _isvalid(ds.cloud_mask).sum(dim=sumdims))

def correct_VELOX(ds):
    return ds.assign(CF_min=ds.CF_min.where((ds.CF_min >=0 ) & (ds.CF_min <= 1)),
                     CF_max=ds.CF_max.where((ds.CF_max >=0 ) & (ds.CF_max <= 1)))

> 

Reviewer 2: `correct_Velox` is quite specific, but used for loading all datasets, not only Velox. Probably just add this to the function `ensure_cfminmax` without giving this an extra function with a name?

Author: yes, I agree. This is a work-around as the current VELOX files have a bug. Michael will check it and hopefully correct the files so that we can delete this function again. So it's in a separate function to be easily deletable ;-)

Reviewer 2: Ah that makes sense, ja!

def ensure_cfminmax(ds):
    if "CF_min" not in ds:
        ds = ds.assign(CF_min=cfmin)
    if "CF_max" not in ds:
        ds = ds.assign(CF_max=cfmax)
    return correct_VELOX(ds)

def midpoint(a, b):
    return a + (b - a) / 2

def cf_circles(ds):
    return xr.concat(
        [
            xr.Dataset({
                "CF_max": ds.sel(time=slice(i["start"], i["end"])).CF_max.mean(dim="time"),
                "CF_min": ds.sel(time=slice(i["start"], i["end"])).CF_min.mean(dim="time"),
                "time": xr.DataArray(midpoint(i["start"], i["end"]), dims=()),
                "segment_id": xr.DataArray(i["segment_id"], dims=())
            })
            for i in segments.values()
        ], dim="time")

> 

Reviewer 2: To ease the understanding which preprocessing steps have been taken on the dataset to generate which plot, I would move the functions that are only used for a specific analysis/plot to that section and leave here only the functions used generally/for all analysis in the notebook, that is moving the `midpoint` and `cf_circles` to the statistical comparison section.

Author: That's a good point. I moved the functions you mentioned to the respective section.

    return ensure_cfminmax(xr.concat([v.get().to_dask().chunk()
                                      for _, v in cat_item.items()], dim="time"))
```

## Get data
We use the [eurec4a intake catalog](https://github.com/eurec4a/eurec4a-intake) to access the data files.

```{code-cell} ipython3
cat = eurec4a.get_intake_catalog()
list(cat.HALO)
```

For each instrument, we extract the data from individual flights and concatenate them to campaign-spanning datasets for the cloud mask files.

```{code-cell} ipython3
cat_cloudmask = {
    "WALES": cat.HALO.WALES.cloudparameter,
    "HAMP Radar": cat.HALO.UNIFIED.HAMPradar_cloudmask,
    "specMACS": cat.HALO.specMACS.cloudmaskSWIR,
    "HAMP Radiometer": cat.HALO.UNIFIED.HAMPradiometer_cloudmask,
    "KT19": cat.HALO.KT19.cloudmask,
    "VELOX": cat.HALO.VELOX.cloudmask,
}
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
data = {k: load_cloudmask_dataset(v) for k, v in cat_cloudmask.items()}
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
data0205 = {k: ensure_cfminmax(v["HALO-0205"].to_dask()) for k, v in cat_cloudmask.items()}
```

## Case study on February 5
We show the cloud masks from the various instruments for an 5 minute time interval around noon on February 5.

> We add 2D vertical lidar and radar data, as well as 2D horizontal imager data for a better visialization of the cloud information content provided by the instruments.

Reviewer 2: visualization

Author: typo corrected.

# remove disturbing spines
lines = []
plot_order = ['WALES', 'HAMP Radar', 'specMACS', 'HAMP Radiometer', 'KT19', 'VELOX']
axes = dict(zip(plot_order, [axL1, axL2, axL3, axL4, axL5, axL6]))

for k in plot_order:
    ds = data_feb5[k]
    lines += ds.cloud_mask.plot.line(ax=axes[k], x="time", label=k, color=colors[k])
    if axes[k]!=axL6:
        axes[k].spines["bottom"].set_visible(False)
        axes[k].xaxis.set_visible(False)
    axes[k].set_ylabel("")
    axes[k].annotate(f"{ds.CF_min.mean().values * 100:.1f}"
                     + f" - {ds.CF_max.mean().values * 100:.1f} %",
                     (1, 0.5), color=colors[k], xycoords="axes fraction")

# We add one legend for all 1D cloud masks
labels = [l.get_label() for l in lines]
axL1.legend(lines, labels, ncol=7, bbox_to_anchor=(0.15, 1.1))
axL3.set_ylabel("cloud flag")

for ax in [axV, axVb, axH, axP, axL1, axL2, axL3, axL4, axL5, axL6]:
    if ax!=axL6:
        ax.set_xlabel("")
    ax.set_title("")
    ax.spines['right'].set_visible(False)
    ax.spines['top'].set_visible(False)
```

```{raw-cell}
fig.savefig("Cloud_masks_example_scene.png")
```

## Statistical comparison

> we will further compare cloud mask information from all HALO flights during EUREC4A on the basis of circle flight segments. Most of the time, the HALO aircraft sampled the airmass in circles east of Barbados. We use the meta data on flight segments, extract the information on start and end time of individual circles, and derive circle-average cloud fractions.  

Reviewer 2: We

Reviewer 2: Nice statistical plots! Here now you didn't specify for SpecMacs and Velox a smaller footprint as above, probably its worth mentioning this difference here explicitly and remember the reader of the quite different footprints.

Author: I added some more information here.
